Add a design document for the split-explicit time stepper (#516)
E3SM-Project/Omega: components/omega/doc/design/SplitTimeStepping.md

(split-time-stepping)=
# Split Time Stepping

<!--- use table of contents if desired for longer documents  -->
**Table of Contents**

1. [Overview](#1-overview)
2. [Requirements](#2-requirements)
3. [Algorithmic Formulation](#3-algorithmic-formulation)
4. [Design](#4-design)
5. [Verification and Testing](#5-verification-and-testing)

## 1. Overview

> To enhance computational efficiency by allowing longer timesteps, ocean models require split barotropic-baroclinic time stepping methods. The implementation described here is based on the approach of [Higdon (2005)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104005236) and the MPAS-Ocean `split_explicit` scheme, with modifications for Omega's non-Boussinesq pseudo-height $\tilde{z}$ vertical coordinate.

Reviewer: would it be useful to reference the v1 equations doc for the pseudo height definition?

Author: Yes, good idea. Section 1 now points to the Omega V1 governing equations design document for the definition of $\tilde z$ in Section 3.1.

Omega currently implements two closely related steppers: `SplitExplicitRK2`, which explicitly subcycles the barotropic mode, and `UnsplitRK2`, which uses the same outer predictor-corrector framework without a barotropic split. The only implemented barotropic algorithm is `Predictor-Corrector`; implicit barotropic stepping and an Adams--Bashforth split-explicit method are future extensions.

The split-explicit method involves the following sequence:

- Decompose velocity into barotropic and baroclinic components.

> - Advance the baroclinic velocities using a large timestep, and compute the vertically averaged forcing, the $\overline{G}$ term.

Reviewer: Without an equation `the $\overline{G}$ term.` doesn't add information.  I'd suggest removing it or citing an equation

Author: Agreed. Now the bullet cites the equation for $\overline{G}$  and the barotropic momentum equation.

- Subcycle the barotropic velocity using small explicit timesteps.
- Construct a corrected transport velocity, update pseudo thickness and tracers,
  and reconstruct the physical velocity.

## 2. Requirements

### 2.1 Requirement: A split time-stepping method in the pseudo-height coordinate

> The algorithm is based on Section 2.3 of [Higdon (2005)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104005236), with modifications to accommodate the $\tilde{z}$-coordinate variables in the non-Boussinesq framework. It accepts the outer time step, requested barotropic time step, barotropic algorithm, number of outer predictor-corrector iterations, number of baroclinic Coriolis iterations, and an option to recompute the velocity split. The `UnsplitRK2` variant advances the full velocity through the baroclinic path and skips all barotropic operations.

Reviewer: I'm a little confused by the last sentence.  Does this mean in a baroclinic step when splitting it is advancing the full velocity and then corrected?  This doesn't make sense to me as it seems that would shrink the max allowed timestep.  If this is outside the scope of this doc, feel free to not make any changes, but I'd be curious to learn.

Reviewer: I think I understand this now.  The key is stepping full velocity u_k vs u_k'.  The baroclinic code with the full velocity is RK2.  My struggle is calling this the 'baroclinic path'.  Is there a way to say that for the full velocity the barotropic code is redundant?  Maybe the simple change is

```suggestion
The algorithm is based on Section 2.3 of [Higdon (2005)](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999104005236), with modifications to accommodate the $\tilde{z}$-coordinate variables in the non-Boussinesq framework. It accepts the outer time step, requested barotropic time step, barotropic algorithm, number of outer predictor-corrector iterations, number of baroclinic Coriolis iterations, and an option to recompute the velocity split. Since the `UnsplitRK2` variant advances the full velocity the barotropic code is redundant.
```

?

Author: Your reading is right, and your understand about the time step is right too. I took your suggestion and dropped "baroclinic path" and made Section 2.1 clearer.

### 2.2 Requirement: Stable time integration for long-term high-resolution simulations

> Stability constrains the maximum allowable timestep, which in turn affects computational cost. The implemented split-explicit time stepping methods must allow for reasonably long timesteps while preventing numerical instabilities, such as those arising from internal gravity waves and barotropic modes, which are particularly important in global-scale and high-resolution ocean modeling. At a minimum, the time-stepping approach used in Omega V2 should accommodate the same timestep sizes as MPAS-Ocean for both the baroclinic and barotropic subsystems since Omega V2 is non-Boussinesq but hydrostatic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stability constrains the maximum allowable timestep, which in turn affects computational cost. The implemented split-explicit time stepping methods must allow for reasonably long timesteps while preventing numerical instabilities, such as those arising from internal gravity waves and barotropic modes, which are particularly important in global-scale and high-resolution ocean modeling. At a minimum, the time-stepping approach used in Omega V2 should accommodate the same timestep sizes as MPAS-Ocean for a given resolution for both the baroclinic and barotropic subsystems since Omega V2 is non-Boussinesq but remains hydrostatic.
```

### 2.3 Requirement: Modularization of baroclinic and barotropic time-stepping methods

Modularity ensures ease of testing and future-proofing of the Omega V2 codebase. Implementing a modular design enables mix-and-match time-stepping schemes of the baroclinic and barotropic subsystems, straightforward integration of alternative time-stepping schemes, and easier maintenance by separating the baroclinic and barotropic time-stepping codes, thereby enhancing flexibility.

## 3. Algorithmic Formulation

### 3.1 Barotropic (external) and baroclinic (internal) mode splitting

> The split-explicit method separates ocean velocity into depth-integrated barotropic and depth-dependent baroclinic components. This separation allows computationally expensive baroclinic modes to run at longer timesteps and computationally efficient barotropic modes to run at shorter timesteps, enhancing computational efficiency and accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The split-explicit method separates ocean velocity into depth-integrated barotropic and depth-dependent baroclinic components. This separation allows computationally expensive slow baroclinic modes to run at longer timesteps and computationally efficient fast barotropic modes to run at shorter timesteps, enhancing computational efficiency and accuracy.
```

Reviewer: also, why does splitting improve accuracy?  it seems a consequence of the chosen time stepper, not the splitting itself, but I'm probably missing something

Author: You're right, it doesn't. That was wrong and I've removed it. The paragraph now says the benefit is efficiency rather than accuracy.

Under the Boussinesq approximation, the steric height $\eta^{\text{steric}}$ reduces to zero:

$$
\eta^{\text{steric}} = H - \tilde{H};
\qquad
\rho \rightarrow \rho_0;
\qquad
H - H = 0.
$$ (split-boussinesq-steric-limit)

A common expression for steric height, following [Griffies (2012)](https://mom-ocean.github.io/assets/pdfs/MOM5_manual.pdf) and [Madec et al. (2015)](https://epic.awi.de/id/eprint/39698/1/NEMO_book_v6039.pdf), is

$$
\eta^{\text{steric}}
= -\int_{-H}^{\eta}
\left(\frac{\rho - \rho_0}{\rho_0}\right) dz .
$$ (split-steric-height-griffies-madec)

The derivation below demonstrates that this definition of $\eta^{\text{steric}}$ is identical to the definition employed in the split system of Omega:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\eta^{\text{steric}}
&= -\int_{-H}^{\eta}
\left(\frac{\rho - \rho_0}{\rho_0}\right) dz \\
&= \int_{-H}^{\eta}
\left(1 - \frac{\rho}{\rho_0}\right) dz \\
&= \int_{-H}^{\eta} dz
- \int_{-H}^{\eta}\frac{\rho}{\rho_0} dz \\
&= \int_{-H}^{\eta} dz
- \int_{-H}^{\eta} d\tilde{z} \\
&= H - \tilde{H} \\
&= \rho_0 S - \frac{B}{\rho_0 g} .
\end{aligned}
$$ (split-steric-height-derivation)

> The barotropic continuity and momentum equations are written as follows.

Reviewer: Can more detail be provided here?  It would make it easier (for at least me to follow).  After looking for a bit I can see how these come about

Author: I added more details on the derivation of the barotropic equations before presenting them. Separately, I annotated the steric height derivation with the two identities used in the non-obvious steps.

An `SE-AB2` method is not implemented. It can be added later using the same barotropic-stepper interface and additional previous-tendency storage.

#### 3.2.1 Initialization

The default outer-iteration count is

$$
\text{NTimeStepIteration} = 2.
$$ (split-ntimestepiter-rk2)

Compute `NBtrSubcycle` as

$$
\text{NBtrSubcycles}
=
\max\left(1,
\left\lceil
\frac{\text{TimeStep}}{\text{BtrTimeStep}}
\right\rceil\right).
$$ (split-nbtrsubcycle)

`BtrTimeStep` is therefore an upper bound requested by the user. The effective
barotropic step is

$$
\Delta t_{\mathrm{bt}}
= \frac{\Delta t}{\text{NBtrSubcycles}}.
$$ (split-effective-btr-timestep)

Compute the barotropic velocity:

$$
\overline{{\bf u}}_e
\equiv
\frac{1}{[\tilde{H}_i]_e}
\sum_{k=0}^{K_{\max}}
[\tilde{h}_{i,k}]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}.
$$ (split-initial-barotropic-velocity)

> For a startup from initial conditions, the code computes this split using the

Reviewer: what is `this split`?  Do you mean barotropic velocity?

diagnostic in the split-explicit scratch space and is not used again during time
stepping; the prognostic quantity is the anomaly $B'$.

Compute the barotropic pressure anomaly:

$$
B_i' = B_i - \rho_0 g b_i.
$$ (split-initial-barotropic-pressure-anomaly)

Time level 1 is then initialized from time level 0 for normal velocity,
baroclinic velocity, barotropic velocity, pseudo thickness, and barotropic
pressure anomaly; tracers are copied at the start of `doStep`. If
`ReinitSplitVelocity` is true, the velocity split is recomputed from
`NormalVelocity` at the beginning of each slow step, including a new depth mean
for `NormalBarotropicVelocity`. When it is false, the existing barotropic
velocity is retained and only baroclinic velocity is reconstructed from the
other two velocity fields. In conceptual notation,
the working state initially satisfies

$$
{\bf u}^{*}_{e,k} = {\bf u}^n_{e,k},
\qquad
\tilde{W}^{*}_{i,k} = \tilde{W}^{n}_{i,k},
\qquad
\tilde{h}^{*}_{i,k} = \tilde{h}^{n}_{i,k},
\qquad
\varphi^{*}_{i,k} = \varphi^{n}_{i,k},
\qquad
p^{*}_{i,k} = p^{n}_{i,k},
\qquad
\tilde{z}^{*}_{i,k} = \tilde{z}^{n}_{i,k},
\quad \text{etc.}

> $$ (split-initial-provisional-variables)

Reviewer: what does the `*` mean here and following?

$$ (split-stage1-gbar-unsplit)

and use one Coriolis iteration. After Stage 1, the implementation exchanges
only the working baroclinic-velocity halo.

#### 3.2.3 Stage 2: Barotropic velocity advance, explicitly subcycled

This stage advances $B'$ and $\overline{\bf {u}}$ as a coupled system through $2M$
predictor-corrector passes, where $M=\text{NBtrSubcycles}$ and
$\Delta t_{\mathrm{bt}}=\Delta t/M$. As in the MPAS-Ocean algorithm, the
passes span an extended $2\Delta t$ barotropic averaging window. For
`UnsplitRK2`, this stage is skipped, $\overline u=0$, and $u=u'$.

The discrete barotropic continuity equation is

$$
B_i^{\prime n+1}
= B_i^{\prime n}
- \Delta t
\left[
\nabla \cdot \left( [(B_i^{\prime n}+\rho_0 g b_i)]_e \overline{{\bf u}}_e^n \right)
\right]_i
- \Delta t\,\rho_0 g Q_i^n.
$$ (split-stage2-discrete-continuity)

The discrete barotropic momentum update is

$$
\overline{{\bf u}}^{n+1}_e
= \overline{{\bf u}}^{n}_e
+ \Delta t
\left(
- f_e \overline{{\bf u}}^{\perp n}_e
- [\overline{\alpha}_i^{*}\nabla B_i^{\prime n}]_e
+ \overline{G}^{*}_e
\right).
$$ (split-stage2-discrete-momentum)

Throughout this section a hat marks a quantity that lives inside the barotropic

> subcycle and changes from pass to pass, as distinct from the unhatted

Reviewer: what is 'pass to pass'?

outer-iteration quantities carried by Stages 1 and 3.

At the start of an outer iteration, initialize the subcycle variables and
accumulators:

$$
\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}^{n}_e = \overline{{\bf u}}^{n}_e,
\qquad
\hat{B}^{\prime n}_i = B_i^{\prime n},
\qquad
\overline{{\bf u}}_e^{\mathrm{sum}}=\overline{{\bf u}}_e^n,
\qquad F_e^{\mathrm{sum}}=0.
$$ (split-stage2-initialization)

The barotropic mass flux is not formed directly from
$(B'+\rho_0gb){\overline {\bf{u}}}$. Instead, the implementation uses the most recent
baroclinic edge pseudo thickness and a pressure-anomaly correction relative to
the provisional outer-iteration state $B'^{*}$:

$$
{\cal P}_e({\cal B}')
= \rho_0g\sum_k[\tilde h_k^*]_e
  + [{\cal B}'-B'^{*}]_e.
$$ (split-stage2-effective-pressure)

Here ${\cal B}'$ is a formal argument rather than a field: it stands for
whichever subcycle-level pressure anomaly the caller supplies. It is set
calligraphic rather than hatted so that it cannot be read as any one particular
buffer, following the same convention as the other calligraphic symbols in this

> document, ${\cal P}_e$, ${\cal R}$, and ${\cal T}$, none of which is a prognostic

Reviewer: This paragraph is very confusing.  I don't recall calligraphy to this point and there has been a lot to this point, can you explain again what this is?  What do you mean by buffer?

field. Each pass forms a barotropic mass flux in three of its kernels, the $B'$
predictor, the $B'$ corrector, and the transport accumulation, and each supplies
a different blend of the subcycle buffers, given with the equations below.

The two velocity kernels are not among them: they need the *gradient* of the
pressure anomaly across an edge, not the edge pressure ${\cal P}_e$ that
multiplies a velocity to make a flux. Only the bracketed difference in
Eq. {eq}`split-stage2-effective-pressure` depends on ${\cal B}'$; the column
sum is common to all three.

> The column sum $\sum_k[\tilde h_k^*]_e$ uses the flux pseudo thickness on edges

Reviewer: do you mean the flux is used to update pseudo thickness which updates the column sum?

produced by the pseudo-thickness auxiliary state, so it already carries the
configured centered or upwind edge reconstruction. It is evaluated once, before
the subcycle loop begins, and is held fixed for all $2M$ passes.

The reference $B'^{*}$ is the provisional barotropic pressure anomaly at the
working time level on entry to Stage 2, in the same sense the asterisk carries
elsewhere in Section 3.2: $B'^n$ on the first outer iteration and the
$\rho_0 g(\tilde H^{*}-b)$ of Eq. {eq}`split-reset-barotropic-pressure-anomaly`
left by the previous outer iteration afterward. It is likewise held fixed and is
only overwritten by the final corrected anomaly after the last pass, so
${\cal P}_e$ measures the departure of the subcycled anomaly from the baroclinic
column mass. This is what enforces the [Hallberg and Adcroft (2009)](https://adcroft.github.io/assets/pdf/hallberg_adcroft_OM_2009.pdf) consistency
described in Section 3.2.4. Note that $B'^{*}$ is unhatted and so is an
outer-iteration quantity; the hatted $\hat B^{\prime *}$ appearing in the

> predictor-corrector equations below is a different thing, the subcycle predictor

Reviewer: do you need to say it's a different thing?  can you just say it is the subcycle predictor output?

output.

The edge value of the anomaly correction uses the same centered or upwind choice

> selected for pseudo-thickness fluxes. With the upwind choice, ties at zero

Reviewer: what does 'ties at zero normal velocity' mean

\left(
(1-\gamma_1)[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}_e]^{n+m/M}
+
\gamma_1[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}^{*}_e]^{n+(m+1)/M}
\right),
$$ (split-stage2-b-predictor-flux)

and

$$
[\hat{B}_i^{\prime *}]^{n+(m+1)/M}
=
[\hat{B}_i']^{n+m/M}
+
\frac{\Delta t}{M}
[-\nabla \cdot [F^{*}_e]^{m+1}]_i.
$$ (split-stage2-b-predictor)

**$\overline{\bf {u}}$ corrector:**

$$
[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}_e]^{n+(m+1)/M}
=
[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}_e]^{n+m/M}
+
\frac{\Delta t}{M}
\left(
-f_e[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}_e^{\perp *}]^{n+(m+1)/M}
-
[\overline{\alpha}_i]^{*}_e
\nabla
\left(
(1-\gamma_2)[\hat{B}_i']^{n+m/M}
+
\gamma_2[\hat{B}_i^{\prime *}]^{n+(m+1)/M}
\right)_e
+
\overline{G}_e
\right).
$$ (split-stage2-u-corrector)

**$B'$ corrector:**

$$
[F_e]^{m+1}
=
{\cal P}_e\left(
(1-\gamma_2)[\hat{B}_i']^{n+m/M}
+
\gamma_2[\hat{B}_i^{\prime *}]^{n+(m+1)/M}
\right)
\left(
(1-\gamma_3)[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}_e]^{n+m/M}
+
\gamma_3[\hat{\overline{{\bf u}}}^{*}_e]^{n+(m+1)/M}
\right),
$$ (split-stage2-b-corrector-flux)

and

$$
[\hat{B}_i^{\prime \mathrm{cor}}]^{n+(m+1)/M}
=
[\hat{B}_i']^{n+m/M}
+
\frac{\Delta t}{M}
[-\nabla \cdot [F_e]^{m+1}]_i.
$$ (split-stage2-b-corrector)

> On *hatted* subcycle quantities the asterisk denotes a different buffer

Reviewer: what is a 'buffer'?

$$
\overline{{\bf u}}^{*} = \overline{{\bar {\bf u}}}^{\text{bt}} \quad \text{from Stage 2},
$$ (split-reset-barotropic-velocity)

$$
{\bf u}^{*} = \overline{{\bf u}}^{*} + u^{\prime *},
$$ (split-reset-full-velocity)

with pseudo thickness and tracer concentration reset by
Eqs. {eq}`split-reset-provisional-psi` and
{eq}`split-stage3-provisional-tracer` of Section 3.2.5. The column totals then
follow:

$$
\tilde{H}^{*} = \sum_{k=0}^{K} \tilde{h}_k^{*},
$$ (split-reset-column-pseudo-thickness)

and

$$
B^{\prime *} = \rho_0 g\left(\tilde{H}^{*}-b\right).
$$ (split-reset-barotropic-pressure-anomaly)

The full working velocity is the sum of the working split velocities. The state
and tracer halos are exchanged before the next outer iteration.

After the final iteration, Stage 1 still stores the working baroclinic velocity
at the midpoint:

$$
{\bf u}^{\prime *}={\bf u}^{\prime n+1/2}.
$$ (split-final-baroclinic-velocity)

$$
\overline{{\bf u}}^{n+1} = \overline{{\bar {\bf u}}}^{\text{bt}} \quad \text{from Stage 2},
$$ (split-final-barotropic-velocity)

$$
{\bf u}^{n+1}
= \overline{{\bf u}}^{n+1}
  +2{\bf u}^{\prime n+1/2}-{\bf u}^{\prime n},
$$ (split-final-full-velocity)

$$

> \psi^{n+1} \quad \text{is retained for pseudo thickness and tracers},

Reviewer: do you mean \phi here?  but if so how do tracers (phi) impact pseudo thickness?

  from `NormalVelocity` at the beginning of every slow step. The default is
  false.
- `NBtrSubcycles`: Internal count computed as
  `max(1, ceil(TimeStep / BtrTimeStep))` when the stepper is constructed, and
  only for `SplitExplicitRK2`. `TimeStepper::changeTimeStep` does not currently
  recompute this count, so a stepper whose time step is changed after
  construction keeps its original subcycle count and shrinks
  $\Delta t_{\mathrm{bt}}$ proportionally.

If `ModeSplitShare` or `BtrTimeStep` is omitted from a user configuration, the
requested barotropic step defaults to the slow `TimeStep`, giving one nominal
subcycle and two predictor-corrector passes. `configs/Default.yml` supplies the
whole subgroup, so the fallback applies only when a run configuration replaces
rather than extends the defaults.

The `ModeSplitShare` settings shipped in `configs/Default.yml`, together with a
`SplitExplicitRK2` selection, are:

```yaml
TimeIntegration:
  TimeStepper: SplitExplicitRK2
  TimeStep: 0000_00:10:00
  ModeSplitShare:
    BtrTimeStepper: Predictor-Corrector
    BtrTimeStep: 0000_00:00:20
    NTimeStepIteration: 2
    NBclCoriolisIteration: 2
    ReinitSplitVelocity: false
```

> #### 4.1.2 Class/structs/data types

Reviewer: i'm a little confused by this section.  Are these modifications to certain classes from this timestepper?  New classes?

  the pseudo-thickness and tracer auxiliary variables needed by Stage 3, in
  time-level and explicit-velocity-array forms.
- `Eos`: Stores `DepthIntegSpecificVolume`, the column integral of specific
  volume weighted by pseudo thickness, and `DepthMeanSpecificVolume`, that
  integral divided by the column-integrated pseudo thickness. Both are computed
  by `computeDepthIntegratedSpecificVolume` and are registered as `Eos` fields.
  `DepthMeanSpecificVolume` is the $\overline{\alpha}$ used by both the
  barotropic momentum equation and the barotropic pressure-anomaly contribution
  to the baroclinic velocity tendency.
- `VertCoord`: Stores `TotalPseudoThickness`, the column sum $\tilde H$, and
  `TotalGeometricThickness`, the column geometric depth $H=\rho_0 S$ of
  Eq. {eq}`split-column-geometric-thickness`.
- `OceanInit`: `initStateForTimeStepper` calls
  `TimeStepper::initializeStateFromInput` after the initial-state or restart
  read and after `initUpdateHaloAndHostArrays`, then exchanges the state halo and
  copies to the host.

### 4.2 Methods

The implemented `doStep` control flow is shown below. Pacer instrumentation and

> the communicator used only by its timing barriers are elided.

Reviewer: elided?

$$
{\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}
= {\bf u}_{e,k}^{n+0.5}.
$$ (unsplit-transport-velocity)

Compute $\tilde{W}_{i,k}^{*}$ using ${\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}$.

Compute pseudo thickness tendencies using ${\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}$:

$$
\tilde{h}_{i,k}^{n+1}
=
\tilde{h}_{i,k}^{n}
-
\Delta t\,
\nabla \cdot
\left([\tilde{h}_{k}^{*}]_e {\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}\right)
-
\Delta t
\left(
[\tilde{W}_{tr}]^{\text{top}}_{k}
-
[\tilde{W}_{tr}]^{\text{top}}_{k+1}
\right).
$$ (unsplit-pseudo-thickness-update)

Compute tracer tendencies using ${\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}$:

$$
\varphi_{i,k}^{n+1}
=
\varphi_{i,k}^{n}
-
\Delta t\,
\nabla \cdot
\left([
\tilde{h}_{i,k}^{*}]_e
[\varphi_{i,k}^{*}]_e
{\bf u}_{e,k}^{\text{tr}}
\right)
-
\Delta t
\left(
[\varphi^{*}\tilde{W}_{tr}]^{\text{top}}_{i,k}
-
[\varphi^{*}\tilde{W}_{tr}]^{\text{top}}_{i,k+1}
\right).
$$ (unsplit-tracer-update)

#### 3.3.5 Reset variables

If iterating, reset the provisional variables as follows:

$$
{\bf u}^{*} = {\bf u}^{n+0.5} \quad \text{from Stage 1},
$$ (unsplit-reset-velocity)

$$
\tilde h^{*}
=\tilde h^n+\frac{\Delta t}{2}{\cal T}_{\tilde h},
\quad \text{with tracer concentration averaged as in Stage 3},

> $$ (unsplit-reset-provisional-psi)

Reviewer 2: Is this a break from the MPAS-Ocean algorithm? Does this correspond to the MPAS-Ocean lines https://github.com/E3SM-Project/E3SM/blob/fe750f50e98187afe02103349d8363acd7745a9a/components/mpas-ocean/src/mode_forward/mpas_ocn_time_integration_split_ab2.F#L1898-L1914?

```suggestion
$$
\tilde h^{*}
=0.5 (\tilde h^n+{\tilde h}^{n+1}),
$$ (unsplit-reset-provisional-psi)
```

Author: @cbegeman , Thanks for taking a look at this document.

It follows the same algorithm used in MPAS-Ocean. In Omega, I update the pseudo thickness using `updateThicknessByTend` with $\((\Delta t / 2)\)$, which avoids an extra loop for computing  $\(0.5(\tilde{h}^n + \tilde{h}^{n+1})\)$ during the outer iterations.
I also updated the document. Sections 3.3.4 and 3.3.5 were largely repeating Sections 3.2.5 and 3.2.6, except for the velocity-related parts. So I consolidated those sections and now refer back to Sections 3.2.5 and 3.2.6 instead.

loop rather than the degenerate single-subcycle case. Because
`changeTimeStep` does not recompute `NBtrSubcycles`, the finer refinement level
runs the same ten subcycles at half the barotropic step.

The supporting operators added for the split scheme have their own unit tests:

- `TendencyTermsTest` adds `testCoriolisAccelerationOnEdge`, which checks both
  the layered and single-layer forms of `CoriolisAccelerationOnEdge` against an
  independently computed tangential reconstruction.
- `EosTest` adds `testDepthIntegratedSpecificVolume`, which checks the column
  integral against a constant specific volume and thickness.
- `VertCoordTest` checks `TotalPseudoThickness` after `computePressure` and
  `TotalGeometricThickness` after `computeTotalGeometricThickness` against
  analytic column values.

Additional focused unit tests should cover velocity split and recombination,
barotropic-pressure initialization, ceiling-based subcycle selection,
centered and upwind anomaly interpolation, the transport-velocity correction,
restart preservation of the three split prognostic fields, and rejection of halo
widths smaller than three.

> ### 5.2 Polaris tests

Reviewer 2: Is it possible/useful to run a barotropic test case with split-explicit to verify that the baroclinic code isn't affecting the barotropic dynamics?

Author: That’s a great suggestion. Thanks. Do you have a particular barotropic test case in Polaris that you would recommend? I remember there are several options, but if you have one in mind, I can start with that.

Reviewer 2: I think the `manufactured_solution` case is probably the best place to start
